---
layout:     post
title:      "SMC & Optimization"
subtitle:   "Dirty jobs in PhD's first year life"
date:       2015-02-13 12:00:00
author:     "Binghuan Lin"
header-img: "img/post-bg-06.jpg"
---
<p>During my first 1 year and half PhD life, I did something related to Sequential Monte Carlo (also known as particle filtering) and optimization techniques. As a doctoral student in Econ/Finance, "it might be a good idea to start to learn some technique, explore data and get hands dirty" (non-exact quote from Prof. Harrison Hong at the Lecture on Behavioral Finance.) </p>

<p>Here is list of internet resources of which I found to be very useful when studying those techniques. The list is incomplete and biases to my personal view due to my limited knowledge of SMC and optimization.</p>

##SMC##

###Papers###
1. Introduction of applications of SMC in Econ/Finance: Creal, D. (2012). A survey of sequential Monte Carlo methods for economics and finance. Econometric Reviews, 31(3), 245-296.
2. Seminal paper of introducing particle filtering: Gordon, N. J., Salmond, D. J., & Smith, A. F. (1993, April). Novel approach to nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian state estimation. In IEE Proceedings F (Radar and Signal Processing) (Vol. 140, No. 2, pp. 107-113). IET Digital Library.
3. Kitgawa stratified resampling (resampling step is important; From my experience, this one works well and it is easy to implement): Kitagawa, G. (1996). Monte Carlo filter and smoother for non-Gaussian nonlinear state space models. Journal of computational and graphical statistics, 5(1), 1-25.
4. Auxiliary particle filter: Pitt, M. K., & Shephard, N. (1999). Filtering via simulation: Auxiliary particle filters. Journal of the American statistical association, 94(446), 590-599.          The (1997) version of the paper contains details of the implementation.
5. Smooth likelihood estimator (Likelihood is a byproduct of the particle filtering procedure, but if you need to, for example, perform a maximum likelihood estimation based on that, this paper is worth reading.): Pitt, M. K. (2002). Smooth particle filters for likelihood evaluation and maximisation.
6. Liu & West filter: Liu, J., & West, M. (2001). Combined parameter and state estimation in simulation-based filtering. In Sequential Monte Carlo methods in practice (pp. 197-223). Springer New York.
7. Particle learning: Carvalho, C. M., Johannes, M. S., Lopes, H. F., & Polson, N. G. (2010). Particle learning and smoothing. Statistical Science, 25(1), 88-106.
8. CDKF, CDPF and application for DSGE model:  Andreasen, M. M. (2011). Non-linear DSGE models and the optimized central difference particle filter. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 35(10), 1671-1695.

###Prof's Sites###
1. Pierre Del Moral: http://web.maths.unsw.edu.au/~peterdel-moral/
2. Arnaud Doucet: http://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/~doucet/smc_resources.html

###Books###
1. (ADVANCED) Feynman-Kac Formulae Genealogical and Interacting Particle Systems with Applications.  A difficult one, but definitely worth reading if you are into SMC.

###Software###
1. Dynare github: https://github.com/DynareTeam/dynare      Developers of Dynare (a package for DSGE model) has implemented some of the particle filter algorithm which are available at the github. 
2. CDKF CDPF: https://sites.google.com/site/mandreasendk/home-1      A sample of  implementation of CDKF and CDPF is available at the author's site.





<p>Photographs by <a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/nasacommons/">NASA on The Commons</a>.</p>